Good afternoon and welcome to
the FireWire in Depth session.
Yesterday in the FireWire
overview session,
we reviewed the Macintosh
FireWire hardware,
as well as demonstrated the
FireWire software stack on Mac OS X.
Today we'd like to go into more
details regarding FireWire driver
development for Mac OS X so we
can see a lot of exciting FireWire
devices for the Macintosh platform.
With that said, I'd like to turn it
over to Eric Anderson,
Engineering Manager for the
FireWire Software Development team.
Thank you, Greg.
You know this is a USB device,
so... I just meant I'm
not familiar with it.
Okay, yesterday we talked at length
about just all things FireWire,
that we have it on all of our products,
all of the great devices
that you guys have made,
1394B, where we're going,
and we told you that Mac OS X has
lots of good FireWire services.
So today,
we're going to talk in-depth about all
of those FireWire services on Mac OS X.
In particular,
the message I want to give all of
you is that we are providing the
tools you need to develop drivers,
applications, plug-ins for FireWire,
for Mac OS X,
and we'll spend a lot of time
going through how that works.
In particular,
we'll have some in-depth discussion
of how driver loading works and
how driver matching is done.
Of course, it's very important to
have your driver in-depth.
You want to have your
driver match your device.
Otherwise, what's the point?
We'll tell you where to find the SDK.
It's right there on the slide.
It'll be on the slide at the end also.
You don't have to scramble
to write that down.
And we'll talk about source.
There's the URL for Darwin.
Much of the FireWire
family is in open source.
We've already started to receive
feedback from some of our developers,
bug fixes, comments.
That's terrific.
That's exactly how it's supposed to work.
Please keep that up.
Okay, the FireWire API in Mac OS X is
very similar to what's in Mac OS 9,
because you need to do the same things.
It's been changed mechanically
to fit within I/O Kit C++,
but all the concepts
are basically the same.
We have asynchronous,
isochronous services for
sending and receiving packets.
It's based on forming a
command and then sending it.
It's just done in an I/O Kit way.
The isochronous transport, in particular,
uses the same DCL mechanism
that we used in Mac OS 9.
If you have existing DCLs,
it should be very easy to adapt
them to work with Mac OS X.
We have the same SBP-2 service layer.
In fact, it was ported over directly.
This makes it easier to write
drivers for devices like disks,
cameras, printers,
scanners that use the SBP-2 protocol.
has all the same features,
unlimited logical units, unlimited orbs,
and it's not tied to storage.
It's an all-purpose SBP-2 interface.
Finally,
we have something new in Mac OS X because
it didn't really apply in Mac OS 9,
and that's a user client,
more properly known
as a device interface.
This allows you to talk to your
FireWire devices from application space,
which is much easier than writing
code to go inside the kernel.
I'll talk about that later.
Specifically,
we have user clients for both SBP-2
and for just plain generic FireWire,
and you can use those interchangeably.
You can use them both at once.
We have an SDK available
with extensive sample code.
It shows how to write in user space.
There's an SBP-2 Cocoa application.
There's command line applications.
A bunch of good stuff in there.
And significantly,
not only is this SDK now available,
but it's available for free
public download to anybody.
You don't need to have access
through Apple's developer relations
program like was necessary
with Mac OS 9 for many years.
So we're doing everything we can to get
this out and make it available to you.
Now let's talk in more detail about
what's in there and how it works.
IO FireWire family is the core
of FireWire services in Mac OS X.
Its job is basically the same as what
FireWire support did in Mac OS 9.
It's a central point of communication
for all things FireWire.
If you have multiple devices,
multiple drivers, multiple applications,
they all want to communicate
on a single FireWire bus.
The FireWire family's job is to let
them all do that at the same time
without interfering with each other.
So it's a multiplexing point.
In Mac OS X,
the FireWire family is implemented as a
dynamically loadable kernel extension,
also known as a KEXT.
It will be loaded whenever
there's a FireWire bus that
needs this software service.
There's three main parts to the core.
Iofirewirefamily KEXT is
the FireWire services,
and there are two hardware drivers for
the two kinds of FireWire interface
that we have shipped in our products.
AppleLynx KEXT is a driver for
the older PCI-Lynx interface that
was used in the blue and white G3.
AppleFWOHCI KEXT is the driver for
the industry standard 1394 open
host controller interface that we
ship in all of our products today.
In Mac OS 9,
these two drivers were bundled
together into the file FireWireEnabler.
In Mac OS X, to fit within the way that
I/O Kit loads drivers,
they're present as independent
KEXTs within the extensions folder.
We have some additional FireWire
services that come along as part
of the standard installation.
IO FireWire DV is the standard
device driver for DV cameras,
very similar to what we had in Mac OS 9.
It's also a KEXT.
I'll talk more about this later.
It may not really belong in the kernel,
but that's where it is now.
I/O FireWire SBP-2 KEXT is the service
layer that provides the SBP-2 API.
In Mac OS 9, this was simply built
in to FireWire support.
In Mac OS X, to be consistent with the
way that I/O Kit works,
it's provided as a separate KEXT,
but it will load whenever an SBP-2
device is around and provide you with the
API to allow you to talk to that device.
Finally, as I mentioned,
we have user clients,
or device interfaces,
for both ordinary FireWire
and for SBP-2 in particular,
to make all of these services available
out in user land to minimize your
need to write code in the kernel.
This picture shows where FireWire fits
in the grander scheme of Mac OS X.
Down at the bottom,
you can see that drivers for FireWire
exist at the very bottom of the
kernel within the I/O Kit framework.
That's where I/O FireWire
family is located and also
the OHCI or LINX drivers,
depending on what hardware
you have in your system.
The figure shows that above
them is the BSD layer,
where you find things
like the file system.
Some kinds of FireWire drivers
will go up to that layer.
For example,
a mass storage driver goes to the
file system because it provides a
block storage device on which the file
system actually implements directories
and structures to store your files.
But other kinds of driver
may bypass the BSD system,
as shown by this path
over here to the right.
For example,
the DV driver goes straight to QuickTime,
which is an application-level service,
so BSD really isn't
involved in the DV driver.
Also up on top,
I've shown Carbon and Cocoa because
these are places that,
using the user clients,
you can access FireWire services.
So you don't need to go down in
the very bottom of the kernel.
You can write up in application space.
Now I'm going to show in much more
detail what elements are in the stack
of FireWire services and how they get
built up when a device is plugged in,
so that you'll find out where
your driver exists within all
of these layers of software.
Everything begins with an IOPCI device.
The PCI family will have discovered
a FireWire interface of some kind,
probably on a PCI card, built-in,
or on a CardBus card,
and will create an IOPCI device
object corresponding to it.
In I/O Kit, the information in that
object matches to Apple,
in this case we'll use
the example of OpenHCI.
It matches to Apple FireWire OHCI,
which is a subclass of IO FireWire Link.
IO FireWire Link has all of the
functions that would be needed
for any FireWire interface.
Apple FireWire OHCI has specific
hardware control for the OpenHCI.
It's DMA engine,
so it's not a DMA engine.
The PCI links, for example,
are quite different from PCI links.
Those two are loaded as one, as a unit,
that will provide the device
driver layer service for actually
controlling the FireWire hardware.
In response to having those loaded,
the next layer up is instantiated.
IO FireWire Controller,
which is a subclass of IO FireWire Bus,
this is where the family exists.
All of the family services
are provided in this layer,
and it's invoked when there's actual
hardware for it to provide services for.
Pushing IO FireWire Controller now
down to the bottom of the picture will
keep building up from where we were.
The family will scan the bus looking for
devices that we might load drivers for.
For every device on the bus that
at least has a configuration ROM,
will be presenting a session
on the FireWire device.
This session will be focused
on the FireWire device itself.
We will create an I/O FireWire device.
This corresponds to a device with
a node ID that's out there on the
bus that's actually responding to
our requests to read the config ROM.
I/O FireWire device itself is
a subclass of I/O FireWire NUB,
which is just a more general object
for talking to FireWire devices.
The IO FireWire device
layer will scan the config
ROM looking for unit directories.
In a FireWire device,
a unit directory publishes information
about what that device does.
A disk drive has an SPP2 unit directory
that says it speaks the SPP2 protocol.
Within there are further details
about the fact that it's a disk drive,
or a DVD-RAM,
or some other kind of device.
A DV camcorder has a unit directory
that says it speaks the AVC command set.
And then there's further
information within about exactly
what kind of device it is.
The IOFireWire device layer's
job is to scan the config ROM,
finding hopefully at least one,
maybe more, unit directories,
and it will create this
IOFireWire unit object,
which itself is also a
subclass of IOFireWireNub.
I/O FireWire Unit actually
gives us the first hint about
what this device really does.
So I/O FireWire Unit further scans
the config ROM and puts information
in the I/O registry that's used
to match a driver to this device.
pushing IO FireWire
Unit down to the bottom.
Let me show the example of how
things load for a disk drive.
From the unit directory,
we learn that the device is SBP-2.
It has a spec ID and software version
that indicate the SBP-2 protocol.
Consequently, the IO FireWire SBP-2
target layer gets loaded.
This is the general service
layer for an SBP-2 device.
It will further scan the
configuration ROM to discover SBP-2
logical units within that device.
For each logical unit that it finds,
it will create IO FireWire SBP-2 LUN,
LUN being short for Logical Unit.
Finally, the LUN will match against a
particular driver for the actual
device that you've plugged in.
In the case of a hard drive,
Apple provides a
standard built-in driver.
If you use Mac OS 9 and
you remember the API call
FWGetLocalFWReferenceIDFromFWReferenceID,
you'll love this.
will talk about Apple FireWire
Mass Storage Drivers,
which is a subclass of IO FireWire
Serial Bus Protocol Transport.
Together, these are Apple's standard
driver for mass storage devices.
It covers hard drives, magneto-optical,
CD-ROM, and various other
standard kinds of devices.
This puzzle piece architecture,
you probably recognize this from the
USB and the storage presentations.
The puzzle piece edge that's
sticking out the right-hand side of
Apple FireWire mass storage drivers
indicates that this is a layer
that you might want to subclass.
If you have your own device that
has vendor-unique functionality that
makes it better than somebody else's,
you don't have to write an entire
new driver for your device.
You can start with Apple FireWire
mass storage drivers,
or perhaps just IO FireWire
serial bus protocol transport,
and subclass the unique functionality
of your device at this level.
Suppose your device isn't in the kernel.
Suppose you want to communicate
to it from user space.
If you went to the I/O Kit summary,
you've probably heard that we
recommend avoiding writing drivers
in the kernel if you possibly can.
It's much easier to debug things
in user space than in the kernel.
So we provide a user client,
which is a piece of software that
can bridge the user kernel gap.
Going back down to IO FireWire
Device and IO FireWire Unit,
if you want to talk to a
device from user space,
then IO FireWire User Client
will be loaded within the kernel
as the driver for a device.
This is basically just a bunch
of glue that knows how to talk
up into application space.
Pushing User Client down to the bottom,
now we reach the user kernel boundary.
Above here, we have IO FireWire Lib.
This is another piece provided by Apple.
It's the counterpart to
IO FireWire User Client.
IO FireWire Lib can be used by
a CFPlugin that you provide.
The CFPlugin is written in user space
and runs in an application context
and can talk to IO FireWire Lib to
communicate with a FireWire device.
Typically,
it would be loaded by an application.
As an example,
if you have a FireWire scanner,
your application might be
something like Photoshop.
Your CFPlugin might be a
plugin for the particular kind
of scanner that was found.
So this gives you a flexible
architecture for dealing with
multiple kinds of device,
perhaps multiple applications,
without rewriting a lot of
code over and over again.
It's not shown here on the slide,
but if you had some really unique
FireWire device that was only ever
going to talk to a single application,
like maybe some kind of FireWire
salad shooter or something,
you could connect this up
directly to IO FireWire Lib.
You don't have to use
the plugin architecture,
but most people want to write something
that's flexible that can talk to multiple
applications or multiple devices.
Use the plugin architecture for that.
And again, this is the area where
you could write software.
You could write the application,
you could write the plugins,
the rest below is provided by Apple.
Now let's talk about more details
about the individual objects that
you saw as we built up the stack.
IO FireWire Controller is the
heart of the FireWire family.
This is where all the logic exists
to manage a FireWire interface.
As I mentioned before,
a single FireWire interface
may support multiple devices,
multiple applications,
multiple protocols, all going through the
same hardware interface.
IO FireWire Controller provides
the services to actually talk
to that hardware to multiplex
the different requests.
It also provides the
bus management services.
So some of the things that are common
that have to be shared by all drivers,
address space management.
Some kinds of FireWire drivers will
allocate FireWire address space.
That's a range of memory in the Macintosh
that can be addressed over FireWire.
Drivers for DV and SBP don't
need to do this by themselves,
typically, but if you design your own
protocol or if you're doing a
shared memory kind of application,
you might allocate some FireWire
address space so that other
devices on the bus can read and
write memory in the Macintosh.
That address space is a shared resource,
so it's handed out by
IO FireWire controller.
Packet transmission and
reception all flows through here.
When a packet comes into the Macintosh,
at this layer we can look at it,
figure out who it's for,
hand it to one of the appropriate
drivers that's loaded on the system.
Likewise,
when software wants to transmit packets,
this is the layer where they
get queued up and transmitted
one by one on the FireWire bus.
If you want to write a protocol driver,
IO FireWire Controller will be
the provider for your driver.
A protocol driver is software that
loads once for each FireWire bus,
as opposed to an ordinary FireWire
driver which loads once for each
instance of your device on the bus.
A protocol driver might be used
if you're speaking a protocol
like TCP/IP or perhaps MLan,
where you really just want
one driver on the Mac,
not several drivers talking
to each FireWire bus.
And as I mentioned earlier,
Apple Lynx and Apple FW-OHCI are
subclasses of IO FireWire
Controller that know how to talk
to the specific DMA controllers in
the products that we've shipped.
I mentioned IO FireWire Device,
that this is created for any device
on the bus where we are able to
read at least the bus information
block from the config ROM.
There will be one of these per device.
IO FireWire Device keeps track
of the node ID in a device,
which may change from time to time due
to dynamic reconfiguration of the bus.
IO FireWire Device also
discovers the vendor ID,
which is in the root directory,
and publishes this in the IO registry so
that you can use it for driver matching.
But the main job for IO FireWire
Device is to scan the configuration
ROM on the device that it is attached to,
looking for unit directories,
and when it finds them,
publish those unit directories
in the IO registry so that
driver loading can continue.
I/O FireWire Unit.
This is what's created
by I/O FireWire device.
For each unit directory
discovered in the config ROM,
there's one I/O FireWire unit.
The unit will find and
publish the unit spec ID,
unit software version, and again,
the vendor ID in the I/O registry
so that this information can be
used for continued driver matching.
An ordinary FireWire device
driver in the kernel will have
IO FireWire unit as its provider.
Both IO FireWire Device and IO FireWire
Unit derive from IO FireWire Nub.
If you want to find out how these work,
you should definitely look in the Nub,
which is where a lot of
the activity takes place.
Now, what kinds of things do we
put in the I/O registry?
There are two service
planes that FireWire uses.
There's the primary
I/O Kit service plane.
That's what you get by default
when you run I/O Registry Explorer.
You can find the I/O FireWire
controller in there,
hanging off of the
corresponding PCI node.
You can find I/O FireWire device,
if you have any devices on your bus.
And if you do, you can probably also
find I/O FireWire unit.
There's also an IO FireWire plane
created by FireWire in the registry.
This is where we store
some FireWire-specific
information about bus topology.
And you can find FireWire controller
and FireWire device objects in there.
Okay,
now I'd like to give a demonstration of
some of the things that we've included
in our software development kit.
So if I can have Demo 1 up on the screen.
Thank you.
I can't see you all really well,
but I'd like to see a show of hands.
How many people have downloaded,
installed, and used one of our
FireWire SDKs for Mac OS X?
Can you raise your hands?
So most of you haven't,
but thank you for everyone who did.
What I'd like to show you now is
some of what we have in the SDK.
We have spent a lot of time
trying to provide a foolproof,
straightforward SDK with sample code,
with examples, pre-compiled binaries,
step-by-step instructions
that you just can't fail.
Let me show you how easy this is to use.
I have a CD here with
the FireWire SDK on it.
You would probably download
this from our website.
I'm simply going to drag
it into my home directory.
Here it is, ioFireWireSDK7.sith.
This is the latest one.
Simply double-click on the
archive file and it will expand.
and now we have a standard
Mac OS X installer.
For those of you who started
with FireWire SDK number one,
you may recall some very tedious
steps for how to install the software.
If you went through those,
you probably learned some
useful things about how Unix
works and how we store KEXTs.
But we've made it quite a bit easier now.
You can simply use the installer.
Pick a drive on which
you'd like to install.
Choose a directory within that drive,
such as Apple is the local user here.
We'll put it in the Documents folder.
Select Install,
and in just a few seconds,
the SDK will be installed,
and you'll be ready to go.
There, that was a lot easier than going
through that script we used to have.
So the SDK is now in my
Documents folder as FireWire SDK.
Here's some of the things in here.
Readme.txt and readme.rtf,
these are exactly the same file.
Open this one if you're
running in Classic or Mac OS 9.
running in Mac OS X.
This has step-by-step instructions for
how to walk you through installing,
building, running, everything in the SDK.
You can't fail if you just
follow them line by line.
It's very straightforward.
We've tried it over and over again.
Let me show you some of the
highlights of what's in here.
Let's start in the Tools folder.
IO Registry Explorer, this is a standard
Mac OS X developer tool.
It's provided in the
standard developer install.
We've made a very minor change
that makes it a little more
convenient to use on FireWire.
I'll run this and show you what's
changed and also show you how to navigate
around and find FireWire objects.
Actually, before I do that,
I'm going to turn on this FireWire camera
so that we have somebody to talk to.
Within the Registry Explorer,
you will have to dig a
little ways to find FireWire.
Registry Explorer is very similar to
Display Name Registry for Mac OS 9,
except it's organized more
like Mac OS X's Finder view
that has these rows of columns.
Power Mac 3.4 is the actual
hardware we're running on.
If we look inside the platform expert,
we find various kinds of device.
This PCI bus, I just happen to know,
has FireWire on it.
You might try the other two
first if you can't find it.
Here's FireWire over here.
FireWire at E.
And this system, since it's our G4,
has an open HCI in it.
Starting here,
you may have spotted what we
changed in this particular
version of Registry Explorer.
These numbers that are shown in
decimal are also shown in hex.
It's a very little thing, but...
Here's where it really starts to matter.
If you go into IO FireWire
controller and look at your node ID,
65473, I don't know if that's right,
but FFC1 is clearly node
1 on the FireWire bus.
So having hex in here
should be helpful to you.
So these are the things that you
saw in the stack that built up.
Apple FW-OHCI,
which is an IO FireWire controller.
It has discovered this camera on the
bus that created an IO FireWire device.
Within the device you can see
things like the vendor name,
the model because they provided
a string in there for us,
the node ID.
This device has a unit directory,
so IO FireWire unit was created.
The user client also gets
tacked on at this point.
Here in the unit,
you can see the unit spec ID, A02D,
which specifies the
1394 trade association,
and the unit software version, 1001 HEX.
This specifies the AVC command set,
which is reasonable because
this is a DV camcorder.
And in fact, we loaded the IO FWDV driver
against this device.
So you can see that IO Registry
provides information similar
to Display Name Registry,
and it has the details that
you'll need to figure out what
we thought of your device,
what we thought its unit contained,
its vendor was,
so that you can find the information to
enter in Project Builder for matching
your device so that your driver can
load correctly against your device.
One of the other tools
provided in the SDK is HackTV.
This is just a standard
QuickTime sample code.
It's a little application that
will receive video from the camera.
There's actually two files provided.
HackTVStructure.Sketch is
a really simple picture.
If you attended our kitchen in Tokyo,
I think William drew this on the fly,
and so we put this in the SDK.
It just shows the layers
of things inside HackTV,
how all the parts are working together.
Hack TV itself will open up a connection
to the camera and display video from it.
So here you can see the DVs coming in,
just like the iMovie demo
that we showed yesterday,
except this is running in just a
simple standard QuickTime sample code.
CarbonVid Out app is a similar
application that can take a DV file
and export it back to a camera.
And you can watch it play
at full 30 frames per second
on the screen on the camera.
UUID generator is a small
tool that you may need to use.
You can read about the
details when you get to that.
Backing up to the top of the SDK,
this directory source contains
full source code to the IO FireWire
family and IO FireWire SBP-2,
including all of the user clients.
So you can find out exactly what we did.
A few of you have even found
bugs and reported those.
We're fixing all that.
All the other goodies
are here in Examples.
There's a number of programs,
sample code, to show you how to use
FireWire on Mac OS X.
Let's start with SBP-2 sample project.
Let me show you just how
easy it is to compile,
build, and run our sample code for SBP-2.
This is a Cocoa application.
I'll open it up in
Project Builder and build it.
This application talks to
an arbitrary SBP-2 device.
To build the application,
all you do is click on the
hammer in Project Builder,
wait a moment while it
compiles everything.
You can see there's a fair
amount of stuff in here.
This application will talk to
this FireWire disk drive and
will serve as a sample for how
to gain access to your device,
how to form an orb and
send it to your device,
how to get data back,
and it shows how to do it all in
Project Builder with Cocoa as well.
It'll take just a moment to build.
Sorry, the question was,
do you have Code Warrior sample code?
And we don't have any at this time.
We'd certainly like to add that, however.
If one of you has
already figured that out,
we'd be happy to throw it in the
SDK if you just send it to us.
Otherwise, we'll take care of that.
Ignore that build warning, and it's done.
We've built the SBP-2 sample,
and you can find it here in this
directory that was created called build.
Here's an application, text, and plug-in.
I'm going to skip a few steps.
I've already installed these in the
system folder so that they'll load.
Now, nothing's here because I didn't
actually plug in the drive.
So the app has found an SBP-2 device.
In fact, it found the IO FireWire SBP-2
LUN object that I told you about earlier,
corresponding to the single logical
unit that's present in a disk drive.
We will select that,
and we get a window that allows
us to log into the device,
which I will do.
The device spins up in response to that,
and now that it's spinning,
we can press this button to
read a block from the device.
This simply reads block 0 and dumps
it out completely raw in this window.
Cocoa makes this really easy to do.
Nothing in here was specific
to a disk drive except actually
the read block zero command.
So, you can use this application and code
as a starting point for talking to
just about any kind of SBP-2 device.
There's other things in the SDK.
I'm going to go into the
pre-built binaries folder,
but all of this is provided
as source code as well.
FWUtil is a very simple command line
program that can read quadlets out
of your FireWire device just to show
you how to start talking to a device.
IO FireWire Lib Demo is similar,
except it shows the entire
config ROM of your device.
FireWire Packet Queue Test can send
packets between two Macintosh systems.
Notifier provides you with some sample
code for how to get notification
when things happen on the bus,
like a device appearing.
Read Test and Write Test are
isochronous sample code that use the
DV driver to capture and export DV.
It does it right from the command line,
as opposed to Hack TV,
which does it in a nice GUI application.
So let's take a look at some of these.
Oops.
Trust you can all see this.
So using the terminal,
I'm going to run some of the
programs that are provided in
the pre-built binaries folder.
We'll start with FWUtil.
This is a really simple program.
The device it's talking to, I believe,
is this hard drive.
Might be the camera.
You can use commands similar
to what was in Firebug.
I'm going to read a quadlet
out of the configuration ROM.
This particular quadlet is the first 32
bits of the serial number of the device.
Here's the next 32 bits.
This looks like it's the
disk drive because I--no,
this is the camera.
85 is Canon's vendor ID,
so we've read the serial number out of
this device using this command line tool.
Not terribly useful,
but all the source code is provided so
that you can adapt this into something
that your customers would actually use.
IO FireWire libdemo I mentioned
earlier reads the entire config ROM all
at once and dumps it out in hex.
It's extremely easy to use.
There you can see, in fact,
it's dumped them out for both
devices on the FireWire bus,
the camera and the disk drive.
One of them seems to have
a lot of empty space,
but all of the data is here.
So as you can see,
we have a lot of stuff in the SDK.
It's all completely ready to use.
It's been pre-compiled,
so you can just run it.
Building it in Project Builder
is just a single click.
Some of the command line tools are
built by compiling them in Terminal,
but there are step-by-step,
there being one-step, instructions in the
SDK for how to do that.
Okay, that's all the highlights
for things in the SDK.
Hopefully,
what you'll take away from this
is that it's all ready to use.
We believe you can ship,
you can develop drivers, applications,
user space code,
and ship it to customers for
FireWire with what we've got here.
Of course,
we're working on bringing you more,
but we've got quite a
bit to offer in this SDK.
Okay, let's go back to the slides.
I think I went too far.
So I'd like to continue talking
about some of the objects that are
in Mac OS X's FireWire services
that you will be using when you
write code for these devices.
I-O-F-W-Command is the sort of
all-purpose object for sending
commands to a FireWire device.
It's similar to the FireWire
command object in Mac OS 9,
except there's, again,
mechanical changes to fit within
C++ and fit within I-O-Kit.
The IOFW command object provides all
of the services you need for making
synchronous or asynchronous commands,
for handling callbacks
when things are finished.
It's all handled in a common
way through this class.
There are a number of derived
classes for sending particular
kinds of commands to a device.
In particular, IOFW Async command
handles all of your read,
write, and lock operations.
IOFW Bus command handles commands
that apply to the FireWire bus,
such as allocating local address
space or other bus resources.
The class IofwIsocChannel corresponds
to a channel command object in Mac OS 9.
An isochronous channel object
exists corresponding to one active
isochronous channel on the FireWire bus.
The purpose for the existence
of the channel is to keep
track of the actual resources,
the bandwidth and the channel number,
across bus resets.
It also serves as a common reference
point for everyone who's doing something,
sending or receiving,
on that isochronous channel.
So associated with it are
IOFWISOC port class objects.
A port corresponds to an actual point
of talking or listening on a channel.
If a channel is going to
do anything interesting,
it probably has at least one listening
port and exactly one talking port.
You can subclass IOFW-ISOCH port
to provide the mechanisms that are
specific to your device for starting
and stopping communication on a channel.
When a channel is started,
each of its ports will be called so
that it can do port-specific things
to start operating on the channel.
The transmitter could start
a DCL program to send data.
The receiver might program registers in
a device that cause it to pick up the
data and do something useful with it.
Similarly,
IOFW local Isoch port is a port
on a channel that is corresponding
to hardware on the Macintosh.
Generally, if you have a channel,
you will have one local Isoch port on it,
unless you're acting as a manager for
two other devices who think they're
talking to each other on the bus.
A local port corresponds,
or has a DCL program attached to it.
This is the same service
that we had in Mac OS 9.
DCL stands for
Data Stream Control Language,
and it's an abstract programming
language where you build a structure in
memory describing on a packet-by-packet
basis how you're going to send
or receive isochronous data.
We take that DCL program and compile it
into a DMA program that runs on the kind
of hardware that we have in the Mac,
whether it's OpenHCI or PCI-Linux.
So your driver needs no knowledge.
knowledge of the hardware specifics.
The DCL programs in Mac OS X use the same
opcodes and same structure as Mac OS 9.
It should be very easy to adapt an
existing DCL to work in Mac OS X.
Okay, more about user clients.
Formally,
this is called a device interface,
but everyone calls it a user client,
so I will too.
A user client, as I said before,
is a layer of software that
allows you to talk to FireWire
devices from application space.
There's many good reasons for doing this.
In order to hook up to your device,
you may need to put a
stub KEXT in the kernel.
This could be as simple as an empty
KEXT with a little bit of XML to
match your device in order to
give you control over your device.
For example, if you wanted to talk to a
device that also matched against
Apple's standard disk driver,
you might create a stub KEXT that
gets a higher probe score or a
tighter match that would enable you
to win over our disk driver and then
talk to your device from user space.
We provide complete access to
the FireWire services in the
kernel through the user client.
So if your device doesn't
have to be in the kernel
because of OS-specific reasons,
put it in user space.
Some drivers simply have
to go in the kernel.
If you have a mass storage device
that's going to mount a file system,
that has to be in the kernel.
But if you have some kind of printer,
scanner, digital video device,
all of those can go up in user space.
Isochronous services will be available
very soon in the user client.
They're not yet in the SDK,
but that's our number one thing
that we're working on right now.
Probably in the next week or two,
we will post another SDK with
Isochronous services for the user client.
The IO FireWire SBP-2 family
I talked about before.
It's the service layer.
It's ported almost
directly from Mac OS 9,
so it's very similar in how it works,
although it's been cleaned up
to fit properly in I/O Kit,
so there's no strange
legacy Mac OS 9 issues.
This layer is used by the
Apple FireWire disk driver.
Last year,
we had a monolithic demonstration disk
driver to show that it could be done,
but all of the mass storage layer
SBP-2 had been rolled up into
one big mess and made a driver.
It worked, but it was not sustainable,
so we've broken that up
into discrete layers.
This is what's in Mac OS X today,
and it's what's used
by our standard driver.
I mentioned before,
IO FireWire Serial Bus Protocol.
transport KEXT and
applefirewiremassstoragedrivers KEXT.
That's the Apple software that
provides a standard driver.
You can subclass that or replace
it if you need to provide a
driver for your own device.
One particular function of IO FireWire
SBP-2 is it knows how to read the
config ROM of an SBP-2 device and
find SBP-2 specific information
to use for driver matching.
SBP-2 devices publish a command set,
a command set spec ID, logical units,
various other information
that is specific to SBP-2.
You wouldn't find it in a camcorder.
So IO FireWire SBP-2 is the
layer that digs that out,
publishes it in the IO Registry.
And then allows I/O Kit to
perform more precise device
matching using that information.
We have a user client for SBP-2.
This gives you all of the SBP-2 services
that are available in the kernel and
makes them available in user space.
If you want to write a
driver for FireWire printer,
FireWire scanner, FireWire still camera,
you'll probably be using the SBP-2
user client in application space.
You can use this by itself,
or you can use it in combination with
the ordinary FireWire user client.
If you have some device that has
additional functions outside of SBP-2,
you can talk to them with normal
FireWire commands using the
normal FireWire user client.
So you can use one or the other, or both,
depending on the needs of your device.
I/O FireWire DV.
This is the standard DV device
driver that we provide.
It provides services very
similar to what was in Mac OS 9.
It is a device driver for DV cameras.
It can transmit and receive frame
accurate 30 frames per second DV.
It supports normal DV and the new
SDL mode that is present in that
Canon camera I showed you earlier.
Presently,
I/O FireWire DV lives in the kernel.
It lives there because we don't have the
Isochronous API out in user space yet,
so putting it in the kernel worked.
We would like to move that out to user
space and we're going to try to do that.
We certainly recommend if you're
developing an Isochronous driver,
try to do it in user space.
If you want to use IO FireWire DV,
you can access it through
QuickTime using the Sequence Grabber,
just like you would in Mac OS 9.
And there's a lot of
sample code in the SDK,
as I showed you earlier,
that can get you started
on how to do that.
Okay, so what do we have that's new?
We've actually gotten quite a lot done
since last year when we told you about
FireWire and Mac OS X for the first time.
This year,
in the shipping version of Mac OS X,
we have full support for OpenHCI.
Last year,
we were really working best on the blue
and white G3 with the old PCI links.
Now we fully support all the hardware.
The SBP-2 service layer and the
standard Apple Disk Driver are
completely new since last year.
They're very full-featured.
The user client for FireWire and the
SBP-2 user client are also all new.
We now have a standard DV driver
and QuickTime component.
As you may have seen yesterday
in the intro to FireWire,
iMovie is running just fine on Mac OS X.
We couldn't show any kind
of DV at all last year.
FireWire booting.
There's not a whole lot to say here.
You can boot from FireWire
devices in Mac OS X.
Just go into the preferences.
pick a FireWire device and boot from it.
SDKs.
We have published a bunch of
FireWire SDKs for Mac OS X already.
In a major change from what
we were doing on Mac OS 9,
we've made these free
and completely available.
Anyone can download them.
Just go to our website.
Here's what we're going to
be working on for the future.
As I mentioned,
the isochronous services in the
user client aren't quite done yet.
There was no corresponding
service in Mac OS 9.
This is something new.
We're making good progress on it.
We expect to have an SDK out within
a week or two that you can try.
In particular,
we intend to provide a sample code
for a DCAM camera device driver.
We have more sample code in general,
more documentation,
we've added HeaderDoc, more tools.
We also have a bunch of other
tools that we're going to be using.
of bug fixes coming in the next SDK.
Here's some general areas that we're
going to work on over the next year.
1394.3, also known as the
Peer-to-Peer Data Transport.
This is a protocol layer
that sits on top of SBP-2.
This was invented by
the printer community.
It's suitable for printers
and may be useful for other
kinds of devices as well.
It provides multiple streams
or pipes of communication over
a single SBP-2 connection.
If you have a device,
I don't believe there's
any shipping today,
but if you have a device
that uses this protocol,
you could write software for
it with the SBP-2 user client.
But part of what you invent there
would be common to any PPDT device,
so we will provide a standard layer
to make that even easier to do.
IEEE 12.12.R is a revision to
the specification that says
how config ROMs are laid out.
In particular, it contains a new service
called instance directories.
This is a slightly different
way to describe the functions
in your device as opposed to the
unit directory that we use today.
Many of the consumer electronics
vendors felt it would be better to
describe a device based on its function
rather than based on its protocol,
so an instance directory tells you
what kind of functions a device has.
We plan to add support for that since
devices are starting to appear that have
this kind of data in their config ROM.
This would give you an alternate way
of loading device drivers for a device.
The purpose of instance directories is
to be a better way to discover functions,
so it's natural to make it available
for driver matching and loading.
Finally, as I talked about yesterday
at the intro section,
we're going to be spending a
lot of time working on 1394B,
or more precisely,
our hardware folks are going to be
spending a lot of time working on 1394B.
Almost nothing changed in software,
so we'll make a few little touch-ups
and then ship that out to you.
In conclusion, for Mac OS X,
we have extensive FireWire services.
We believe it's really the equal
of what we had in Mac OS 9.
Everything is there for you to
start writing drivers today.
Please pick up the SDK.
Here's the URL again that
provides information for both
the SDK and our mailing list.
This is a public mailing list.
Anybody can subscribe.
The exact details are at this URL.
All we ask is that if you do
have confidential information,
maybe we've sent you a seed unit
or you're working on some new
product that nobody knows about,
please don't talk about
it on the mailing list.
You can ask general questions.
Sometimes people do ask secret questions,
and I remove the secret information and
post the response on the mailing list.
The response so far has been quite good.
Many of you have been answering each
other's questions on the mailing list,
which is great.
We do what we can to
answer questions as well.
So if you're not participating,
please sign up and please
participate in that mailing list.
Thank you.
Finally, as I said,
much of our source code is open source.
It's in Darwin.
It's also all provided in our SDK.
If you do find a bug or you find
something that could be done better,
a feature you'd like to add,
let us know about it.
Use the standard Darwin mechanism
to submit your change.
We've already picked up and incorporated
some changes that you've sent in.
Related sessions here at WWDC.
Yesterday there was a
very good presentation on
storage drivers in I/O Kit.
This is information that you'd need if
you're writing or subclassing drivers
for storage devices on FireWire.
If you missed the presentation yesterday,
I believe there will be a
DVD series available from
WWDC so you can catch it there.
Tomorrow at this same time, 2 o'clock,
we will have our feedback forum,
combined FireWire and USB,
that's in room J1 down at the complete
opposite end of the convention
center from where we were yesterday.
That is like open mic night.
You can just come and
say whatever you want.
Tell us what you like,
what you don't like, ask questions,
it's completely open.
We just want your feedback for whether or
not we're meeting your needs in Mac OS X.
Finally, tomorrow night, starting at 7,
back at Apple in the piano bar.
I think it says 6 there.
We will have a FireWire
and USB plug fest.
So there's a big Apple party
at the Apple campus tomorrow.
Come on by the piano bar,
it's in building 4 right out
front by the parking lot.
That's where we'll be.
Bring your FireWire
device or your USB device.
You can hang out with FireWire engineers.
If you do have bugs,
we will have all the engineers
there with the source code.
We'll try to look at things as well as
we can between taking big chugs of beer.